docs/user-guide/cli-reference.md, before:

# CLI Reference

shruggie-indexer is invoked as a single command with options and an optional target path.

## Command Structure

```
shruggie-indexer [OPTIONS] [TARGET]
```

`TARGET` is an optional positional argument specifying the file or directory to index. When omitted, the current working directory is used.

## Target Options

### `TARGET` (positional argument)

The filesystem path to index. shruggie-indexer auto-detects whether the path is a file or directory and dispatches to the appropriate indexing logic.

- If omitted, defaults to the current working directory.
- Must point to an existing path (validated at invocation time).

### `--file` / `--directory`

Force the target to be treated as a file or directory, overriding auto-detection.

```bash
# Force file interpretation (useful for symlinks)
shruggie-indexer --file path/to/ambiguous-item

# Force directory interpretation
shruggie-indexer --directory path/to/target
```

If the forced type does not match the actual filesystem type, a warning is logged but processing continues.

### `--recursive` / `--no-recursive`

Control recursive directory traversal. Default: `--recursive`.

```bash
# Index a directory and all its subdirectories (default)
shruggie-indexer path/to/dir --recursive

# Index only the directory's immediate children
shruggie-indexer path/to/dir --no-recursive
```

For single-file targets, this option has no effect.

## Output Options

Three independent output flags control where JSON output is written. Multiple output destinations can be active simultaneously.

### `--stdout` / `--no-stdout`

Write the complete JSON index to standard output.

- **Default behavior:** Enabled when no other output destination (`--outfile`, `--inplace`) is specified. Disabled when another output destination is active.
- **Explicit `--stdout`:** Forces stdout output alongside other destinations.
- **Explicit `--no-stdout`:** Suppresses stdout output entirely.

### `--outfile`, `-o`

Write the combined JSON output to the specified file path.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --outfile index.json
shruggie-indexer path/to/target -o index.json
```

- The parent directory must exist.
- Existing files are overwritten without prompting.
- Disables stdout output by default (use `--stdout` to re-enable).

### `--inplace`

Write individual sidecar JSON files alongside each indexed item.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --inplace
```

For files, the sidecar is named `<filename>_meta2.json`. For directories, the sidecar is named `<dirname>_directorymeta2.json` and placed inside the directory. The root target directory does not receive an in-place sidecar — the aggregate output file (`--outfile`) serves that purpose.

| Item | Sidecar path |
|------|-------------|
| `photos/sunset.jpg` | `photos/sunset.jpg_meta2.json` |
| `photos/vacation/` | `photos/vacation/vacation_directorymeta2.json` |

Disables stdout output by default (use `--stdout` to re-enable).

### `--dir-meta` / `--no-dir-meta`

Control whether `_directorymeta2.json` directory sidecar files are written.

```bash
# Suppress directory metadata — only per-file sidecars are written
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --inplace --no-dir-meta

# Explicitly enable (default behavior)
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --inplace --dir-meta
```

- **Default:** Enabled (`--dir-meta`). All directory sidecars are written normally.
- **`--no-dir-meta`:** Suppresses directory-level `_directorymeta2.json` sidecars during `--inplace` output. Per-file `_meta2.json` sidecars are unaffected.
- Auto-generated aggregate output files (those ending in `_directorymeta2.json` produced by the output path defaulting logic) are also suppressed.
- Explicitly specified `--outfile` paths are never suppressed, regardless of this flag.
- Stdout output is never affected by this flag.
- Maps to the `write_directory_meta` configuration key.

## Metadata Options

These options control embedded metadata extraction and sidecar metadata processing.

!!! warning "Implication chain"
    The metadata flags form an implication chain:

    - `--meta-merge-delete` implies `--meta-merge`
    - `--meta-merge` implies `--meta`

    You only need to specify the highest-level flag you want. The implied flags are activated automatically.

### `--meta`, `-m`

Extract embedded EXIF/XMP/IPTC metadata from files via [ExifTool](../getting-started/exiftool.md).

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/file.jpg --meta
```

When active, each file entry's `metadata` array includes an `exiftool.json_metadata` entry containing the extracted metadata as a JSON object. If ExifTool is not installed, a warning is logged and the entry is omitted — this is not a fatal error.

### `--meta-merge`

Discover sidecar metadata files alongside each indexed item and merge their content into the parent entry's `metadata` array. Implies `--meta`.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --meta-merge
```

Sidecar files (`.info.json`, `.description`, thumbnails, subtitles, etc.) are identified by configurable filename patterns. The original sidecar files remain on disk.

### `--meta-merge-delete`

Merge sidecar metadata into parent entries and delete the original sidecar files from disk after indexing completes. Implies `--meta-merge` (and therefore `--meta`).

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --meta-merge-delete --outfile index.json
```

!!! warning "Requires persistent output"
    `--meta-merge-delete` requires at least one of `--outfile` or `--inplace` to be active. Without a persistent output destination, the merged metadata would be lost when the sidecar files are deleted. Violating this constraint produces a fatal error (exit code 2).

Each merged sidecar entry carries full filesystem provenance — path, size, timestamps, and content hashes — sufficient to reverse the deletion if needed.

The pipeline executes in a fixed order: **index → write sidecars → rename → delete**. Sidecar deletion occurs only after all other phases complete successfully. Each successful deletion is logged at `INFO` level; failures are logged at `ERROR` level and do not abort the remaining deletions.

## Rename Options

### `--rename`

Rename files to their deterministic, hash-based `storage_name` values.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --rename
```

For a file with `id` of `yA8A8C089A6A8583B24C85F5A4A41F5AC` and extension `exe`, the storage name is `yA8A8C089A6A8583B24C85F5A4A41F5AC.exe`. Directories are renamed to their `id` (e.g., `x3B4F479E9F880E438882FC34B67D352C`).

!!! note "Rename implies in-place"
    `--rename` automatically enables `--inplace` so that sidecar files are written alongside each renamed item, preserving the original filename in the index entry.

### `--dry-run`

Preview rename operations without modifying any files.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --rename --dry-run
```

Logs each proposed rename at `INFO` level. Only meaningful when used with `--rename`.

## Identity Options

### `--id-type`

Select which hash algorithm is used for the `id` field and `storage_name`. Choices: `md5` (default) or `sha256`.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/file --id-type sha256
```

| `--id-type` | `id` example | `id` length |
|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| `md5` | `yA8A8C089A6A8583B24C85F5A4A41F5AC` | 33 chars (1 prefix + 32 hex) |
| `sha256` | `yB6BA115C2B43D87AADDF0060C44726E7AF1A12C9501FC63DE652A9517D7367DB` | 65 chars (1 prefix + 64 hex) |

Both algorithms are always computed regardless of this setting. This option only controls which digest is promoted to the `id` field.

### `--compute-sha512`

Include SHA-512 in the computed `HashSet` objects. SHA-512 is excluded by default to reduce output size.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/file --compute-sha512
```

When enabled, every `hashes` and `name.hashes` object in the output includes a `sha512` field.

## Configuration

### `--config`

Path to a TOML configuration file. Overrides the default config file resolution.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --config my-config.toml
```

See the [Configuration](configuration.md) page for the file format and available settings.

## Logging Options

### `-v`, `--verbose`

Increase logging verbosity. Repeatable.

| Flag | Log level | Output |
|------|-----------|--------|
| (none) | `WARNING` | Warnings and errors only |
| `-v` | `INFO` | Informational messages (progress, implications) |
| `-vv` | `DEBUG` | Detailed diagnostic output |
| `-vvv` | `DEBUG` (all) | Full trace-level logging including internal modules |

### `-q`, `--quiet`

Suppress all non-error output. Sets log level to `CRITICAL`. Overrides `--verbose` if both are specified.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/target -q
```

In quiet mode, the exit code is the primary success/failure signal.

### `--log-file`

Write log output to a persistent file for later analysis.

```bash
# Write to the default app data directory
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --log-file

# Write to a specific file
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --log-file /path/to/output.log
```

| Usage | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| `--log-file` (no argument) | Write to the default platform-specific log directory |
| `--log-file <path>` | Write to the specified file path |

**Default log directory by platform:**

| Platform | Directory |
|----------|-----------|
| Windows | `%LOCALAPPDATA%\shruggie-tech\shruggie-indexer\logs\` |
| macOS | `~/Library/Application Support/shruggie-tech/shruggie-indexer/logs/` |
| Linux | `~/.config/shruggie-tech/shruggie-indexer/logs/` |

Log files are named by date and session: `YYYY-MM-DD_HHMMSS.log`. The log level written to the file matches the currently configured verbosity.

Log file output can also be enabled via the TOML configuration file:

```toml
[logging]
file_enabled = true
# file_path = ""  # empty = use default app data location
```

## General Options

### `--version`

Print the installed version and exit.

```bash
shruggie-indexer --version
```

### `--help`

Print the help text and exit.

```bash
shruggie-indexer --help
```

## Mutual Exclusion Rules

The following constraints are enforced at invocation time:

| Rule | Behavior |
|------|----------|
| `--file` and `--directory` | Mutually exclusive. Only one may be specified. |
| `--stdout` and `--no-stdout` | Mutually exclusive. Click handles this automatically. |
| `--recursive` and `--no-recursive` | Mutually exclusive. Click handles this automatically. |
| `--meta-merge-delete` without `--outfile` or `--inplace` | Fatal error (exit code 2). |
| `--dry-run` without `--rename` | Silently ignored. |
| `TARGET` does not exist | Fatal error (exit code 3). |
| `--outfile` parent directory does not exist | Fatal error (exit code 2). |

## Output Scenarios

The three output flags (`--stdout`, `--outfile`, `--inplace`) combine into the following scenarios:

| Scenario | Flags | Stdout | Outfile | In-place |
|----------|-------|:------:|:-------:|:--------:|
| 1 — Default | (none) | ✔ | — | — |
| 2 — File only | `--outfile index.json` | — | ✔ | — |
| 3 — File + stdout | `--outfile index.json --stdout` | ✔ | ✔ | — |
| 4 — In-place only | `--inplace` | — | — | ✔ |
| 5 — File + in-place | `--outfile index.json --inplace` | — | ✔ | ✔ |
| 6 — In-place + stdout | `--inplace --stdout` | ✔ | — | ✔ |
| 7 — All three | `--outfile index.json --inplace --stdout` | ✔ | ✔ | ✔ |
| Silent | `--no-stdout` | — | — | — |

## Exit Codes

| Code | Name | Meaning |
|------|------|---------|
| `0` | `SUCCESS` | Completed successfully. All items processed. |
| `1` | `PARTIAL_FAILURE` | Completed with one or more item-level errors (skipped items, failed extractions). |
| `2` | `CONFIGURATION_ERROR` | Invalid configuration or flag combination. No processing began. |
| `3` | `TARGET_ERROR` | Target path does not exist or is not accessible. |
| `4` | `RUNTIME_ERROR` | Unexpected error during processing. |
| `5` | `INTERRUPTED` | Cancelled by user via Ctrl+C. |

## Signal Handling

shruggie-indexer implements a two-phase interruption model for graceful cancellation:

**First Ctrl+C (cooperative):** Sets a cancellation flag. The engine finishes processing the current item and then stops cleanly. A message is printed to stderr:

```
Interrupt received — finishing current item. Press Ctrl+C again to force quit.
```

**Second Ctrl+C (forced):** Restores the default signal handler and raises `KeyboardInterrupt` for immediate termination.

### Cancellation and output state

| Output mode | State after interruption |
|-------------|------------------------|
| `--stdout` | No output produced (the entry tree was incomplete). |
| `--outfile` | No output produced. |
| `--inplace` | Partial output — sidecar files for completed items are valid on disk. |

If `--meta-merge-delete` is active, the deletion queue is discarded on cancellation — no sidecar files are deleted.

If `--rename` is active, files renamed before the interrupt retain their new names with valid sidecar manifests. Unreached files keep their original names. Re-running the same command is safe and idempotent.

Commit message:

docs: specification and documentation updates for 20260301-002 batch (Section 3)
Update technical specification and documentation site to reflect both
features implemented in Sections 1-2 of the 20260301-002 updates batch:
provenance-preserving de-duplication and directory metadata suppression.

Specification (shruggie-indexer-spec.md):
- Update spec header date to 2026-03-01
- Add validation rule 5: MetaMergeDelete + write_directory_meta=False constraint (SS7.1)
- Add dedup module imports to public API surface (SS9.1)
- Add 7 dedup symbols to __all__ list (SS9.1)

Documentation site:
- cli-reference.md: Add 'De-duplication during Rename' section documenting
  session-scoped dedup behavior, canonical selection, provenance preservation,
  and dry-run interaction
- gui.md: Document dedup behavior in Rename checkbox description; add
  'duplicates' field info admonition after output mode constraints
- python-api.md: Add 'duplicates' field to IndexEntry dataclass listing;
  document write_directory_meta config field; add full De-duplication API
  section covering DedupRegistry, scan_tree, apply_dedup, DedupResult,
  DedupStats, DedupAction, and cleanup_duplicate_files
- changelog.md: Sync with root CHANGELOG.md — add missing Section 2 entries
  (--dir-meta flag, GUI checkbox, config key, directory metadata tests)

All other spec sections (SS5.3, SS5.10a, SS6.9, SS6.10, SS6.10a, SS7.2,
SS8.3, SS8.9, SS10.3) and schema files were already updated during the
Section 1-2 implementation sprints.

Ref: .archive/20260301-002-Updates.md Section 3

docs/user-guide/cli-reference.md, after:

# CLI Reference

shruggie-indexer is invoked as a single command with options and an optional target path.

## Command Structure

```
shruggie-indexer [OPTIONS] [TARGET]
```

`TARGET` is an optional positional argument specifying the file or directory to index. When omitted, the current working directory is used.

## Target Options

### `TARGET` (positional argument)

The filesystem path to index. shruggie-indexer auto-detects whether the path is a file or directory and dispatches to the appropriate indexing logic.

- If omitted, defaults to the current working directory.
- Must point to an existing path (validated at invocation time).

### `--file` / `--directory`

Force the target to be treated as a file or directory, overriding auto-detection.

```bash
# Force file interpretation (useful for symlinks)
shruggie-indexer --file path/to/ambiguous-item

# Force directory interpretation
shruggie-indexer --directory path/to/target
```

If the forced type does not match the actual filesystem type, a warning is logged but processing continues.

### `--recursive` / `--no-recursive`

Control recursive directory traversal. Default: `--recursive`.

```bash
# Index a directory and all its subdirectories (default)
shruggie-indexer path/to/dir --recursive

# Index only the directory's immediate children
shruggie-indexer path/to/dir --no-recursive
```

For single-file targets, this option has no effect.

## Output Options

Three independent output flags control where JSON output is written. Multiple output destinations can be active simultaneously.

### `--stdout` / `--no-stdout`

Write the complete JSON index to standard output.

- **Default behavior:** Enabled when no other output destination (`--outfile`, `--inplace`) is specified. Disabled when another output destination is active.
- **Explicit `--stdout`:** Forces stdout output alongside other destinations.
- **Explicit `--no-stdout`:** Suppresses stdout output entirely.

### `--outfile`, `-o`

Write the combined JSON output to the specified file path.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --outfile index.json
shruggie-indexer path/to/target -o index.json
```

- The parent directory must exist.
- Existing files are overwritten without prompting.
- Disables stdout output by default (use `--stdout` to re-enable).

### `--inplace`

Write individual sidecar JSON files alongside each indexed item.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --inplace
```

For files, the sidecar is named `<filename>_meta2.json`. For directories, the sidecar is named `<dirname>_directorymeta2.json` and placed inside the directory. The root target directory does not receive an in-place sidecar — the aggregate output file (`--outfile`) serves that purpose.

| Item | Sidecar path |
|------|-------------|
| `photos/sunset.jpg` | `photos/sunset.jpg_meta2.json` |
| `photos/vacation/` | `photos/vacation/vacation_directorymeta2.json` |

Disables stdout output by default (use `--stdout` to re-enable).

### `--dir-meta` / `--no-dir-meta`

Control whether `_directorymeta2.json` directory sidecar files are written.

```bash
# Suppress directory metadata — only per-file sidecars are written
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --inplace --no-dir-meta

# Explicitly enable (default behavior)
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --inplace --dir-meta
```

- **Default:** Enabled (`--dir-meta`). All directory sidecars are written normally.
- **`--no-dir-meta`:** Suppresses directory-level `_directorymeta2.json` sidecars during `--inplace` output. Per-file `_meta2.json` sidecars are unaffected.
- Auto-generated aggregate output files (those ending in `_directorymeta2.json` produced by the output path defaulting logic) are also suppressed.
- Explicitly specified `--outfile` paths are never suppressed, regardless of this flag.
- Stdout output is never affected by this flag.
- Maps to the `write_directory_meta` configuration key.

## Metadata Options

These options control embedded metadata extraction and sidecar metadata processing.

!!! warning "Implication chain"
    The metadata flags form an implication chain:

    - `--meta-merge-delete` implies `--meta-merge`
    - `--meta-merge` implies `--meta`

    You only need to specify the highest-level flag you want. The implied flags are activated automatically.

### `--meta`, `-m`

Extract embedded EXIF/XMP/IPTC metadata from files via [ExifTool](../getting-started/exiftool.md).

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/file.jpg --meta
```

When active, each file entry's `metadata` array includes an `exiftool.json_metadata` entry containing the extracted metadata as a JSON object. If ExifTool is not installed, a warning is logged and the entry is omitted — this is not a fatal error.

### `--meta-merge`

Discover sidecar metadata files alongside each indexed item and merge their content into the parent entry's `metadata` array. Implies `--meta`.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --meta-merge
```

Sidecar files (`.info.json`, `.description`, thumbnails, subtitles, etc.) are identified by configurable filename patterns. The original sidecar files remain on disk.

### `--meta-merge-delete`

Merge sidecar metadata into parent entries and delete the original sidecar files from disk after indexing completes. Implies `--meta-merge` (and therefore `--meta`).

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --meta-merge-delete --outfile index.json
```

!!! warning "Requires persistent output"
    `--meta-merge-delete` requires at least one of `--outfile` or `--inplace` to be active. Without a persistent output destination, the merged metadata would be lost when the sidecar files are deleted. Violating this constraint produces a fatal error (exit code 2).

Each merged sidecar entry carries full filesystem provenance — path, size, timestamps, and content hashes — sufficient to reverse the deletion if needed.

The pipeline executes in a fixed order: **index → write sidecars → rename → delete**. Sidecar deletion occurs only after all other phases complete successfully. Each successful deletion is logged at `INFO` level; failures are logged at `ERROR` level and do not abort the remaining deletions.

## Rename Options

### `--rename`

Rename files to their deterministic, hash-based `storage_name` values.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --rename
```

For a file with `id` of `yA8A8C089A6A8583B24C85F5A4A41F5AC` and extension `exe`, the storage name is `yA8A8C089A6A8583B24C85F5A4A41F5AC.exe`. Directories are renamed to their `id` (e.g., `x3B4F479E9F880E438882FC34B67D352C`).

!!! note "Rename implies in-place"
    `--rename` automatically enables `--inplace` so that sidecar files are written alongside each renamed item, preserving the original filename in the index entry.

### `--dry-run`

Preview rename operations without modifying any files.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --rename --dry-run
```

Logs each proposed rename at `INFO` level. Only meaningful when used with `--rename`.

### De-duplication during Rename

When `--rename` is active, the indexer performs session-scoped de-duplication before any files are renamed. Files sharing identical content hashes are detected across all directories in the target tree:

1. **Scan:** The completed entry tree is walked to identify groups of byte-identical files (same `id` hash).
2. **Canonical selection:** The first file encountered in each group becomes the canonical copy. All others are duplicates.
3. **Provenance preservation:** Each duplicate's complete `IndexEntry` — including its original name, timestamps, filesystem location, and all metadata entries — is stored in the canonical entry's `duplicates` array.
4. **Rename:** Only canonical files are renamed to their `storage_name`. Duplicate files are removed from the entry tree.
5. **Cleanup:** Duplicate files are deleted from disk after the rename phase completes.

```bash
# Run rename with de-duplication (default when --rename is active)
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --rename --inplace

# Preview dedup results without deleting or renaming
shruggie-indexer path/to/directory/ --rename --dry-run
```

In `--dry-run` mode, duplicates are identified and reported in the JSON output (the `duplicates` array is populated), but no files are renamed or deleted.

The `duplicates` field appears on the canonical entry's sidecar JSON. Each element is a full `IndexEntry` preserving the absorbed file's original identity. See the [Schema Reference](../schema/index.md) for field details.

## Identity Options

### `--id-type`

Select which hash algorithm is used for the `id` field and `storage_name`. Choices: `md5` (default) or `sha256`.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/file --id-type sha256
```

| `--id-type` | `id` example | `id` length |
|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| `md5` | `yA8A8C089A6A8583B24C85F5A4A41F5AC` | 33 chars (1 prefix + 32 hex) |
| `sha256` | `yB6BA115C2B43D87AADDF0060C44726E7AF1A12C9501FC63DE652A9517D7367DB` | 65 chars (1 prefix + 64 hex) |

Both algorithms are always computed regardless of this setting. This option only controls which digest is promoted to the `id` field.

### `--compute-sha512`

Include SHA-512 in the computed `HashSet` objects. SHA-512 is excluded by default to reduce output size.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/file --compute-sha512
```

When enabled, every `hashes` and `name.hashes` object in the output includes a `sha512` field.

## Configuration

### `--config`

Path to a TOML configuration file. Overrides the default config file resolution.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --config my-config.toml
```

See the [Configuration](configuration.md) page for the file format and available settings.

## Logging Options

### `-v`, `--verbose`

Increase logging verbosity. Repeatable.

| Flag | Log level | Output |
|------|-----------|--------|
| (none) | `WARNING` | Warnings and errors only |
| `-v` | `INFO` | Informational messages (progress, implications) |
| `-vv` | `DEBUG` | Detailed diagnostic output |
| `-vvv` | `DEBUG` (all) | Full trace-level logging including internal modules |

### `-q`, `--quiet`

Suppress all non-error output. Sets log level to `CRITICAL`. Overrides `--verbose` if both are specified.

```bash
shruggie-indexer path/to/target -q
```

In quiet mode, the exit code is the primary success/failure signal.

### `--log-file`

Write log output to a persistent file for later analysis.

```bash
# Write to the default app data directory
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --log-file

# Write to a specific file
shruggie-indexer path/to/target --log-file /path/to/output.log
```

| Usage | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| `--log-file` (no argument) | Write to the default platform-specific log directory |
| `--log-file <path>` | Write to the specified file path |

**Default log directory by platform:**

| Platform | Directory |
|----------|-----------|
| Windows | `%LOCALAPPDATA%\shruggie-tech\shruggie-indexer\logs\` |
| macOS | `~/Library/Application Support/shruggie-tech/shruggie-indexer/logs/` |
| Linux | `~/.config/shruggie-tech/shruggie-indexer/logs/` |

Log files are named by date and session: `YYYY-MM-DD_HHMMSS.log`. The log level written to the file matches the currently configured verbosity.

Log file output can also be enabled via the TOML configuration file:

```toml
[logging]
file_enabled = true
# file_path = ""  # empty = use default app data location
```

## General Options

### `--version`

Print the installed version and exit.

```bash
shruggie-indexer --version
```

### `--help`

Print the help text and exit.

```bash
shruggie-indexer --help
```

## Mutual Exclusion Rules

The following constraints are enforced at invocation time:

| Rule | Behavior |
|------|----------|
| `--file` and `--directory` | Mutually exclusive. Only one may be specified. |
| `--stdout` and `--no-stdout` | Mutually exclusive. Click handles this automatically. |
| `--recursive` and `--no-recursive` | Mutually exclusive. Click handles this automatically. |
| `--meta-merge-delete` without `--outfile` or `--inplace` | Fatal error (exit code 2). |
| `--dry-run` without `--rename` | Silently ignored. |
| `TARGET` does not exist | Fatal error (exit code 3). |
| `--outfile` parent directory does not exist | Fatal error (exit code 2). |

## Output Scenarios

The three output flags (`--stdout`, `--outfile`, `--inplace`) combine into the following scenarios:

| Scenario | Flags | Stdout | Outfile | In-place |
|----------|-------|:------:|:-------:|:--------:|
| 1 — Default | (none) | ✔ | — | — |
| 2 — File only | `--outfile index.json` | — | ✔ | — |
| 3 — File + stdout | `--outfile index.json --stdout` | ✔ | ✔ | — |
| 4 — In-place only | `--inplace` | — | — | ✔ |
| 5 — File + in-place | `--outfile index.json --inplace` | — | ✔ | ✔ |
| 6 — In-place + stdout | `--inplace --stdout` | ✔ | — | ✔ |
| 7 — All three | `--outfile index.json --inplace --stdout` | ✔ | ✔ | ✔ |
| Silent | `--no-stdout` | — | — | — |

## Exit Codes

| Code | Name | Meaning |
|------|------|---------|
| `0` | `SUCCESS` | Completed successfully. All items processed. |
| `1` | `PARTIAL_FAILURE` | Completed with one or more item-level errors (skipped items, failed extractions). |
| `2` | `CONFIGURATION_ERROR` | Invalid configuration or flag combination. No processing began. |
| `3` | `TARGET_ERROR` | Target path does not exist or is not accessible. |
| `4` | `RUNTIME_ERROR` | Unexpected error during processing. |
| `5` | `INTERRUPTED` | Cancelled by user via Ctrl+C. |

## Signal Handling

shruggie-indexer implements a two-phase interruption model for graceful cancellation:

**First Ctrl+C (cooperative):** Sets a cancellation flag. The engine finishes processing the current item and then stops cleanly. A message is printed to stderr:

```
Interrupt received — finishing current item. Press Ctrl+C again to force quit.
```

**Second Ctrl+C (forced):** Restores the default signal handler and raises `KeyboardInterrupt` for immediate termination.

### Cancellation and output state

| Output mode | State after interruption |
|-------------|------------------------|
| `--stdout` | No output produced (the entry tree was incomplete). |
| `--outfile` | No output produced. |
| `--inplace` | Partial output — sidecar files for completed items are valid on disk. |

If `--meta-merge-delete` is active, the deletion queue is discarded on cancellation — no sidecar files are deleted.

If `--rename` is active, files renamed before the interrupt retain their new names with valid sidecar manifests. Unreached files keep their original names. Re-running the same command is safe and idempotent.
